<!-- http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/2.13/bioc/html/DEXSeq.html -->

<!-- uses the negative binomial distribution to estimate the variance between biological replicates and generalized linear models for testing.  -->
<!-- update requirements -->

## Differential exon usage

So far we have been focusing on analysing the transcriptome from a gene-centric perspective. However, one of the advantages of RNA sequencing is that it allows us to address questions about alternative splicing in a much easier way than it used to be possible with microarrays.
There are a large number of methods to detect significant differences in splicing across conditions (e.g. [cuffdiff](http://cufflinks.cbcb.umd.edu/manual.html#cuffdiff), [mmdiff](https://github.com/eturro/mmseq#flexible-model-comparison-using-mmdiff)), many of which rely on the non-trivial task of estimating transcript expression levels.
Here we will focus on *DEXSeq*, a Bioconductor package for the identification of differential exon usage events from exon counts. In other words, *DEXSeq* reports cases where the expression of a given exon, relative to the expression of the corresponding gene, changes across conditions.

The structure of a *DEXSeq* analysis is analogous to the one we have seen so far for differential expression with *DESeq*: count normalisation, dispersion estimation and differential exon usage test. However, there are a couple of things to take into account before getting started with that workflow.

### Preparing the annotation

Exons might be represented multiple times in a standard GTF file, depending on whether they are shared between multiple transcripts or genes. This overlap can include the entire exon, or just part of it, as illustrated in [Figure 1](http://genome.cshlp.org/content/22/10/2008/F1.expansion.html) from the DEXSeq paper. Thus, in order to ensure that each exon is tested only once, DEXSeq requires a slightly modified annotation file, in which exons are flattened into counting bins.
We only need to prepare this flattened annotation file once, and this can be achieved by executing the command below:

```
# do not run - it takes a while
# you'll find the output here: RNAseq_all/reference

cd RNAseq_all/reference
python /path/to/library/DEXSeq/python_scripts/dexseq_prepare_annotation.py \
	--aggregate=no Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP5.25.62.chr.gtf \
	Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP5.25.62.chr_dexseq_noaggregate.gff
```

**Exercise:** How does the newly generated annotation file differ from the previous one? Try this:
```
cd RNAseq_all/reference

original=Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP5.25.62.chr.gtf
grep FBgn0031208 $original | awk '$3=="exon"'

flattened=Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP5.25.62.chr_dexseq_noaggregate.gff
grep FBgn0031208 $flattened | awk '$3=="exonic_part"'
```
What is the number of lines obtained in each case? What is the number of counting bins for this gene? [Hint](http://apr2011.archive.ensembl.org/Drosophila_melanogaster/Gene/Summary?db=core;g=FBgn0031208;r=2L:6687-10326) - [Solution](https://github.com/mgonzalezporta/TeachingMaterial/blob/master/solutions/_deu_ex1.md)

**Exercise:** One of the options used in this example to generate the flattened annotation file is `--aggregate=no`. What does this refer to? Hint:
```
python /path/to/library/DEXSeq/python_scripts/dexseq_prepare_annotation.py -h
```
[Solution](../solutions/_deu_ex2.md)

Each of the exonic parts in the flattened annotation file are the potentially testable bins. Before we can perform the testing though, we first need to know the number of reads that overlap with each of them.


### Counting reads overlapping exon bins

Provided that we have aligned our reads to the genome with a splice-aware aligner (e.g. TopHat) we can now proceed to count the number of reads that fall into exon bins in our sample:

```
# do not run - it takes a while
# you'll find the output here: RNAseq_all/data/mapped
gff_file=Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP5.25.62.chr_dexseq_noaggregate.gff
bam_file=../data/mapped/untreated3.nsorted.bam
out=$bam_file.dexseq_noaggregate.txt

samtools view $bam_file | python /path/to/library/DEXSeq/inst/python_scripts/dexseq_count.py --paired=yes --stranded=no $gff_file - $out
```

***Exercise:*** By default, `dexseq_count` will only consider reads that mapped with a mapping quality of 10 or more. Even though we didn't explicitly set this option in the command above, we can learn about this on the help text:
```
python /path/to/library/DEXSeq/inst/python_scripts/dexseq_count.py -h
```
What does this threshold refer to? [Solution](../solutions/_deu_ex3.md)

***Exercise:*** Previously we have been calculating the number of reads that overlap each gene using `htseq-count`. Why do you think the authors of `dexseq_count` bothered to create another script for counting? In other words, what's the difference between these two tools? [Solution](../solutions/_deu_ex3.md)

### Loading the counts into R





3.1. real data - do not run

sample code from the vignette:


library(DEXSeq)


sampleTable = data.frame(
   row.names = c( "untreated1", "untreated2", "untreated3", "untreated4", 
   					"treated1", "treated2", "treated3" ),
   countFile = c( "untreated1.counts", "untreated2.counts", "untreated3.counts", "untreated4.counts",
      				"treated1.counts", "treated2.counts","treated3.counts" ),
   condition = c( "control", "control", "control", "control", 
   					"knockdown", "knockdown", "knockdown" ) )


sampleTable

                   countFile condition
untreated1 untreated1.counts   control
untreated2 untreated2.counts   control
untreated3 untreated3.counts   control
untreated4 untreated4.counts   control
treated1     treated1.counts knockdown
treated2     treated2.counts knockdown
treated3     treated3.counts knockdown

annot="/path/to/annotation/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP5.25.62.chr_dexseq_noaggregate.gff"

ecs = read.HTSeqCounts(
    	countfiles = sampleTable$countFile,
    	design = sampleTable,
    	flattenedfile = annot )

3.2. example data

similar to what we did in the normalisation section:

library(DEXSeq)

library("pasilla")

data("pasillaExons")

ecs=pasillaExons


head(counts(pasillaExons))
design(ecs)

4. normalisation
same as we did in DESeq
ecs=estimateSizeFactors(ecs)
sizeFactors(ecs)

5. dispersion estimation
ecs=estimateDispersions( ecs )
ecs=fitDispersionFunction( ecs )

# not all exons will be tested:
counts_subset=head(counts(ecs))
testable_subset=head(fData(ecs)$testable)

cbind(counts_subset, testable_subset)

# how many will be tested from our set?
sum(fData(ecs)$testable)
	# 383

dim(counts(ecs))
	# 498

out="dexseq_dispersion.pdf"
pdf(file=out)
plotDispEsts( ecs )
dev.off()

6. testing for differential exon usage
ecs=testForDEU(ecs)


ecs=estimatelog2FoldChanges( ecs )

result=DEUresultTable(ecs)
head( result )

Q: why do we get NA for FBgn0000256:E006?

Q:how many exons?
r=result[result$padjust<0.1,]
r=r[complete.cases(r),]
dim(r)[1]
Q: how many genes?
length(unique(r$geneID))

out="dexseq_ma.pdf"
pdf(file=out)
plotMA( ecs, FDR=0.1, ylim=c(-4,4), cex=0.8 )
dev.off()
	# exon-centric

7. visualisation

out="dexseq_FBgn0085442.pdf"
pdf(file=out)


plotDEXSeq( ecs, "FBgn0085442", expression=FALSE, norCounts=TRUE, displayTranscripts=TRUE,
   legend=TRUE, cex.axis=1.2, cex=1.3, lwd=2 )

dev.off()


Other approaches
Cuffdiff, mmdiff...

When working with RNA-seq data, several tools exist to quantify differences in splicing across conditions and to address the significance of those changes (e.g. DEXSeq). Quiet often though, these tools result in a long list of genes that is difficult to interpret. By relying on transcript level quantifications, LOREM provides a simple (yet powerful) approach to identify, annotate and visualise the most extreme changes in splicing across two different conditions, namely switch events. In brief, switch events are defined as those cases where, for a given gene, the identity of the most abundant transcript changes across conditions:

http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~mar/tools/lorem/html_test1/

How would you interpret the SRSF6 event?
Hint: https://github.com/mgonzalezporta/lorem/wiki/Tutorial#output-html-sections
